---
Author: Đào Duy Long
Category:
tags:
  - "#medicine"
  - "#surgery"
  - "#gastrointestinal"
  - "#etiology"
Date: 2026-02-10T20:14:00
Number of reviewNumber of review:
Number of review: "0"
---
# Main contents
## Bệnh sinh
Bệnh sinh của viêm ruột thừa bản chất là quá trình viêm làm dày niêm mạc ruột thừa, làm tăng áp lực tĩnh mạch, gây ra thiếu máu thành ruột thừa tạo điều kiện cho sự xâm nhập của vi khuẩn và tác nhân gây bệnh. Từ đó, gây viêm ruột thừa
## Nguyên nhân
Có nhiều giả thuyết được đặt ra về nguyên nhân gây viêm ruột thừa. Trong đó, có 5 nhóm nguyên nhân chính: 
#### Sỏi phân
Careful review of pathologic series shows that luminal obstruction is found in a minority of cases. Fecaliths are present in only 3.6%–27% of cases of acute appendicitis, with most series at the lower end of the range, 17 , 19 and lymphoid hyperplasia is more common in noninflamed appendices than in acute appendicitis. 20 Other causes of luminal obstruction, such as foreign bodies, tumors, and fibrous bands, are uncommon. Finally, the direct measurement of intraluminal pressure at appendectomy for appendicitis reveals an elevated pressure in only a minority of cases. 21
#### Quá sản tổ chức bạch huyết
Chưa có ghi chú thêm
#### Tác nhân gây viêm nhiễm niêm mạc ruột thừa (phổ biến là CMV)
An alternative hypothesis for the etiology of appendicitis is based on the concept that either bacterial or viral enteric infection leads to mucosal ulceration of the appendix and subsequent bacterial invasion by the normal colonic microbiota. The findings that up to 75% of cases of appendicitis demonstrate well-defined superficial mucosal ulceration supports this theory. Furthermore, mucosal ulceration is a more consistent finding than is dilatation of the appendix or the presence of fecaliths and is found earlier in the course of appendicitis. 22 One report found CMV early-antigen expression in 64% of cases with acute appendicitis and no CMV antigens in normal appendices, suggesting that in some cases, CMV infection might produce mucosal ulcerations and lead to acute appendicitis. 23
#### Thức ăn có nhiều chất xơ
"A decrease in dietary fiber intake (the fiber hypothesis) has also been proposed as a cause of appendicitis. According to this hypothesis, decreased dietary fiber causes firm stool and an increased enteric transit time, resulting in more fecaliths and more appendicitis. This hypothesis was felt to explain both the rise in appendicitis rates in the early 20th century and the marked differences in appendicitis rates between more-developed Western countries and less-developed African countries. Doubt has been cast upon this hypothesis, however, for several reasons. First, although dietary fiber ingestion has been falling in urban Africans, appendicitis rates have not risen markedly, 27 and a prospective series from Africa demonstrated continued high fiber intake even in patients with appendicitis. 28 Second, rates of appendicitis in the Western world have fallen without changes in dietary fiber intake.
#### Tư thế đại tiện không thuận lợi
One other theory is that the use of sitting toilets, instead of squatting for bowel movements, may influence the development of appendicitis, as the sitting posture and resultant pelvic dynamics may lead to incomplete bowel evacuation chronically. This behavioral difference has been hypothesized to explain why there are lower rates of appendicitis seen in much of Asia, Africa, and the Middle East compared with Western Europe and the United States. Indeed, advocates for “Squatty Pottys” (Aterian, Inc., Summit, NJ) in the United States have surged in recent years, even as there is no strong evidence that these can decrease the risk for appendicitis.
# References
Zhang IY, Flum DR. Appendicitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. _Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease_. 11th ed. Elsevier; Chapter 122:2127-2135.e3. (https://www.clinicalkey.com/#!/content/book/3-s2.0-B9780443116575001221)